PEP 771: Amendments following pre-publish discussion (#4238)
python/peps: peps/pep-0771.rst

Title: Default Extras for Python Software Packages
Author: Thomas Robitaille <thomas.robitaille@gmail.com>, Jonathan Dekhtiar <jonathan@dekhtiar.com>
Sponsor: Pradyun Gedam <pradyunsg@gmail.com>

> Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-771-default-extras-for-python-software-packages/79706

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/79706/
```

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 13-Jan-2025
Post-History:

>   `15-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/77892/>`__,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `15-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/77892/>`__,
  `06-Feb-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/79706/>`__,
```

Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 13-Jan-2025
Post-History:

>   `15-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/77892/>`__,

Reviewer: Do we want to include the topic to be created now here, just before merging?

Author: If rather do it the other way around if possible, that is do a follow up small PR with the thread otherwise if I make the new thread now it will temporarily link to the old version of the PEP and could cause confusion?

Author: Or is there a way to reserve a thread URL before actually making it public?

Reviewer: > temporarily link to the old version of the PEP

For no more than a minute, though.

> reserve a thread URL before actually making it public?

You can create a thread with only a title but no text, and edit the text in later. But this is probably overkill. If you're really worried, you can create the thread with the [preview link](https://pep-previews--4238.org.readthedocs.build/) and edit it to https://peps.python.org/pep-0771/ the moment this is merged?

A

Author: > For no more than a minute, though.

Sorry maybe there's a subtlety that I don't understand, but this will rely on you or someone else merging the PR as soon as I add the commit here to add the link to the thread, so in principle could be a much longer time? Or are you saying you are ready to merge at short notice? 😆

of the ``[recommended]`` syntax, placing the burden on them to know this for a
typical installation. Having a way to have recommended dependencies be installed
by default while providing a way for users to request a more minimal installation

> would satisfy this use case, and the present PEP will describe a solution to this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
would satisfy this use case, and this PEP describes a solution to this.
```

> Real-world examples of packages that encourage users to include extra
> dependencies by default include for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Real-world examples of packages that encourage users to include extra
dependencies by default include:
```

* `astropy <https://www.astropy.org/>`_, a core package for astronomy, which
  recommends that users install ``astropy[recommended]``. Some of the
  dependencies in ``recommended``, such as `scipy <http://www.scipy.org>`_, are
  used in a number of places in astropy for common
  functionality and scipy should ideally be a required dependency, but there has
  been reluctance to so as it is not a lightweight dependency and advanced users
  who want minimal installs want the ability to opt out of it (however, as
  described above, this places a burden on the majority of regular uses to
  satisfy a use case for advanced users).
* `fastapi <https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/>`_, a web framework, which recommends
  that users install ``fastapi[standard]`` in order to include commonly needed
  dependencies.
* `tensorflow <https://www.tensorflow.org>`_, a machine learning platform, which
  recommends that users install ``tensorflow[and-cuda]`` since CUDA support is

>   commonly needed by users.

Reviewer: This section feels a bit wordy, and repeats the prose description from this section. Perhaps you could list the packages, and say that these fit the description in the paragraph above?

E.g. 

```rst
There are several packages that demonstrate this pattern by encouraging users to include extra dependencies by default, such as:

* (link to astropy): ``astropy[...]``
```

Author: Done

of the ``[recommended]`` syntax, placing the burden on them to know this for a
typical installation. Having a way to have recommended dependencies be installed
by default while providing a way for users to request a more minimal installation
would satisfy this use case, and this PEP describes a solution to this.

Examples of packages that demonstrate this pattern by encouraging users to
include extra dependencies by default include:

> * `astropy <https://www.astropy.org/>`_: ``astropy[recommended]``.

Reviewer 2: nit
```suggestion
* `astropy <https://www.astropy.org/>`_: ``astropy[recommended]``
```

infrastructure to disallow conflicting or incompatible extras to be installed,
and this PEP does not change that.

Examples of packages that require at least one backend or frontend to work and
recommend a default extra to install a backend or frontend include:

* `kivy <https://kivy.org/>`_: ``kivy[base]``

* `napari <https://napari.org>`_: ``napari[all]``

> * `glueviz <https://www.glueviz.org>`_: ``glueviz[qt]``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `glueviz <https://www.glueviz.org>`_: ``glueviz[qt]``
```

infrastructure to disallow conflicting or incompatible extras to be installed,
and this PEP does not change that.

Real-world examples of packages that allow users to select different backends or

> frontends with extras include:

Reviewer: Likewise, I wonder if there's a better (more concise) way of integrating the description of the pattern with the examples.

Author: Done

> as well as in numerous issues and pull requests. The solution that will be
> presented below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as well as in numerous issues and pull requests. The solution that is
presented below:
```

* is an opt-in solution which means that package maintainers can choose whether or not to use it
* is flexible enough to accommodate both of the major use cases described in `Motivation`_

> * does not introduce new syntax compared to :pep:`508` (which would have serious backward-compatibility implications)

Reviewer: "serious backward-compatibility implications" here is unqualified, I would expect an explanation or a link to a section where it is justified.
```suggestion
* re-uses the syntax from :pep:`508`
```

For example, if a package
defines an ``extra1`` default extra as well as a non-default ``extra2``
extra, then if a user were to install the package with:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install package

the ``extra1`` dependency would be included. If the user instead uses:

.. code-block:: console

>     $ pip install package[extra2]

Author: Done

then the ``extra1`` extra would not be installed.

If the same package is specified multiple times in an installation command or
dependency tree, the default extras must be installed if any of the instances of
the package are specified without extras. For instance:

.. code-block:: console

>     $ pip install package package[extra2]

Author: Done - I agree this command isn't easy to parse visually, I've just replaced this with a dependency tree now.

should install the default extras.

Note that ``package[]`` would continue to be equivalent to ``package`` and would
not be provided as a way to install without default extras (see the `Rejected
Ideas`_ section for the rationale).

We also note that some tools such as `pip`_ currently ignore unrecognized

> extras, and emit a warning to the user to indicate that the extra has not been

Reviewer 3: There are no concept of default extras today, so the non-default qualifier doesn't add any context to this sentence that is about status quo.

Maybe an example of `pip install package[this-extra-does-not-exist-in-metadata]` with the warning printed by pip would make this clearer.

> extras, and emit a warning to the user to indicate that the extra has not been

Author: I've added an example of pip emitting a warning

> recognized. In this case, if no extras are recognized as being valid in a

Author: Reworded along these lines

therefore not want to provide an option to install the package without any
extras.

Examples
--------

> The rule in `Overriding default extras`_ regarding only installing default extras

Author: I've shortened this paragraph significantly

Backward Compatibility
======================

> There are several different aspects related to backward compatibility that need
> to be considered.

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't add anything
```suggestion
```

package ``package`` which has a required dependency of ``numpy``, a (default)
extra called ``recommended`` which includes ``scipy``, and a ``minimal`` extra
which does not contain any dependencies. If a user installs ``package[minimal]``,
only ``package`` and ``numpy`` will be installed. If a user then does:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip freeze > requirements.txt

then ``requirements.txt`` will contain e.g.::

    package==1.0.2
    numpy==2.1.0

However, if the user then installs the requirements from this file using:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install -r requirements.txt

then pip will install ``package`` (which will include the default extra) as well
as ``numpy``, so the final environment will contain ``scipy``. A solution in this
specific case is for the user to pass ``--no-deps`` to ``pip install`` to avoid
resolving the dependency tree, but the point here is to illustrate that there
may be changes in behavior in packaging tools due to the change in the
assumption about what impact an extra can have.

Security Implications
=====================

There are no known security implications for this PEP.

> Examples of usage
> =================

Reviewer: Please stick to the suggested sections in [PEP 12](https://peps.python.org/pep-0012/#suggested-sections). Perhaps you could add "examples of usage" as a sub-section, but "how to teach this" is broader than simply stating examples.
```suggestion
How to teach this
=================
```

minimal installation or not - in some cases, such as highlighted in the next
section, this might not be desirable.

> To take one of the concrete examples from the `Motivation`_ section, the

Author: Done - the examples in this and the next two sub-sections are now self-contained (while still referring to the Motivation to indicate they were mentioned before)

Once again taking a concrete example from `Motivation`_, astropy defines several
other extras, including for example ``jupyter``, which adds packages that
enhance the user experience inside `Jupyter <https://jupyter.org/>`_-based
environments. However, it is likely that users opting in to this extra would still
want recommended dependencies to be installed. The following configuration
would solve this case:

.. code-block:: toml

    [project]
    default-optional-dependency-keys = [
        "recommended"
    ]

    [project.optional-dependencies]
    minimal = []
    recommended = [
        "scipy",
        "..."
    ]
    jupyter = [
        "astropy[recommended]",
        "ipywidgets",
        "..."
    ]

Users installing:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install astropy[jupyter]

would then get the same as:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install astropy[recommended, jupyter]

Backward Compatibility
======================

Packages not using default extras
---------------------------------

Once support for this PEP is added to tools in the packaging ecosystem, packages
that do not make use of default extras will continue to work as-is and there

> should be no break in compatibility.

Author: Yes that is correct. Would you like to see the wording changed here?

Packages using default extras
-----------------------------

Once packages start defining default extras, those defaults will only be honored
with recent versions of packaging tools which implement this PEP, but those
packages will remain installable with older packaging tools -- with the main
difference being that the default extras will not be installed automatically

> when older packaging tools are used. As described in `How to teach this`_,

Author: Done

  ``recommended`` in `astropy`_ be a default extra, but in order to support users
  with older versions of package installers, the documentation should still mention
  the extra explicitly as long as possible (until it is clear that most/all users
  are using package installers that implement this PEP). There is no downside to
  keeping the extra be explicitly mentioned, but this will ensure that users with
  modern tooling who do not read documentation (which may be a non-negligeable
  fraction of the user community) will start getting the recommended
  dependencies by default.

* Adding a new extra, whether it be ``minimal`` or another new extra that is to
  be the default, comes with the same caveats that it does prior to this PEP, which
  is that users will only be able to use this extra for releases that define
  this extra. This might seem obvious, but consider a package that has a version
  1.0 prior to using default extras. Suppose that package now defines
  ``minimal`` in 2.0, then downstream users and packages that want to depend on
  a minimal version of the package cannot declare the following dependency::

>     packaage[minimal]>=1.0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    package[minimal]>=1.0
```

Author: Thanks! @willingc made the same suggestion and I committed hers

installations and complicating dependency trees. Using default extras does not
mean that all extras need to be defaults, and there is still scope for users to
explicitly opt in to non-default extras.

Inheriting from default extras
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If package authors choose to make an extra be installed by default, it is important
that they are aware that if users explicitly specify another extra, the default may
not be installed, unless they use the approach described in `Supporting minimal
installations while not always removing default extras`_.

There are cases, such as the interchangeable backends, or the ``minimal`` extras,
where ignoring the default if an extra is explicitly specified is the right
thing to do. However, for other cases, such as using default extras to include
recommended dependencies while still providing a way to do minimal installs, it
may be that many of the other extras *should* explicitly 'inherit' the default
extra(s), so package authors should carefully consider in which cases they want
the default extras to be installed.

Incompatible extras
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In some cases, it may be that packages have extras that are mutually

> incompatible. In this case, we recommend against making using the default extra
> feature for any extra that contains a dependency that could be incompatible with
> another.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
incompatible. In this case, we recommend against using the default extra
feature for any extra that contains a dependency that could be incompatible with
another.
```

Consider a package that has extras ``package[A]`` and ``package[B]``. Users
could already currently try and install ``package[A]`` and ``package[B]`` or
``package[A,B]`` which would result in a broken installation, however it would
at least be explicit that both extras were being installed. Making ``A`` into a
default extra however could lead to unintuitive issues. A user could do:

.. code-block:: console

>     $ pip install package

Reviewer 4: Perhaps add a comment  after the command to specify what is being installed (A as a default)

Author: Done

    $ pip install package[B]

and end up with a broken installation, even though A and B were never explicitly
both installed. For this reason, we recommend against using default extras
for dependencies where this is likely to be an issue.

Package users
-------------

> Package users should be provided with clear installation instructions that show

Reviewer 4: As a napari developer that deals with qt versions and dependencies, clarity is key as a user.

Author: I agree - are there any specific wording improvements you would like to see here, or is this ok?

Reviewer 4: No change needed. This was more a bravo for adding this!

distributions, such as `conda <https://docs.conda.io>`_, `Homebrew
<https://brew.sh/>`_, linux package installers (such as ``apt`` and ``yum``) and
so on, needs to be considered. Not all package distributions have mechanisms
that would line up with the approach described. In fact, some distributions such
as conda, do not even have the concept of extras.

There are two cases to consider here:

* In cases where the repackaging is done by hand, such as for a number of conda-forge
  recipes, and especially where there is no equivalent to extras, the
  introduction of default extras should not have a large impact since manual
  decisions already have to be made as to which dependencies to include (for
  example, the conda-forge recipe for the `astropy`_ package mentioned in the
  `Motivation`_ includes all the ``recommended`` dependencies by default since
  there is no way for users to explicitly request them otherwise).

* In cases where the repackaging is done in an automated, way, distribution maintainers
  will need to carefully consider how to treat default extras, and this may
  imply a non-negligible amount of work and discussion.

> It is impossible for a PEP such as this to exhaustively consider each of the

Reviewer 4: Hmm... @astrofrog, do you expect the impact to be felt most by package maintainers, packaging tool providers, packaging repositories, or package users? It's not clear to me.

Author: It's a bit of a tricky question - if done properly, there shouldn't be a negative impact for end users.

For packaging tool providers, there will be the burden of implementing the PEP and then fixing bugs for corner cases over time. Hopefully once the PEP is implemented, the burden should be low-ish.

For package authors, the burden is opt-in - if they choose to use this feature they should think about it to plan carefully (especially for established packages).

For packaging repositories, I think the main impact will be for repositories that use automation to do the repackaging because there will need to be careful planning related to how to handle this PEP. I think the additional burden will be low for repositories where the repackaging is done by hand.

Sorry this isn't a simple answer :sweat_smile: - but let me know if you think I should add something along these lines to the PEP. It's not really clear where this would go though as there isn't really an 'impact' section where this could be discussed, and it's not *really* part of 'How to teach this'?

Reviewer 4: I think that maybe the way to handle this is to add an intro sentence to "How to teach" such as:

```
This section discusses the information and preparations someone may need to consider after implementing this PEP. The groups covered are:
- End users (package consumers)
- Packaging tooling providers
- Package authors
- Packaging repository maintainers
```
And link to the headings that you have (or could have) for each of these groups. Thoughts?

Author: @willingc - I've now added an intro paragraph to this section based on your suggestion above

    package1
    └── package2
        └── package1

If ``package1`` has a default extra named ``recommended`` and a ``minimal``
extra which is empty, then:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install package1[minimal]

will still result in the ``recommended`` extra being installed if ``package2``
continues to depend on ``package1`` (with no extras specified). If the dependency
tree was updated to instead be::

    package1
    └── package2
        └── package1[minimal]

Then ``package1`` would no longer be installable with tools that do not yet
implement this PEP (if those tools would fail on unrecognized extras). Authors
therefore need to carefully consider a migration plan, coordinating with the
authors of ``package2``.

Packaging repository maintainers
--------------------------------

The impact on individuals who repackage Python libraries for different
distributions, such as `conda <https://docs.conda.io>`_, `Homebrew
<https://brew.sh/>`_, linux package installers (such as ``apt`` and ``yum``) and
so on, needs to be considered. Not all package distributions have mechanisms
that would line up with the approach described. In fact, some distributions such

> as conda, do not even have the concept of extras.

Reviewer 5: Speaking from "the other side", I would have to say that pip functionality is a strict subset of the functionalities available by repackagers. Primarily based on my knowledge of linux package managers, but also with regard to conda and spack. I know you're specifically calling out conda here as not being able to support the PEP, but I'm saying conda *specifically* can -- and so can everyone else.

I feel like the python community by and large has a lot of expertise in how pip works but very little study into how anything other than pip works. :( There is a lot of interesting practical research that's been done over the decades. Perhaps you're already planning to do that though -- the wording of this section somehow gives me the feeling that it's a bit of an open TODO to flesh out the actual considerations! Feel free to ask me for more details if so.

(Incidentally: I oppose the PEP anyway because despite all the functionality of it being representable by repackagers, the PEP largely makes decisions that explicitly close the door on what I would consider as the primary functionality of "extras" as they are used in other ecosystems. There is very little to gain here without taking a holistic view of things. And much to lose if you e.g. define what is currently unspecified/invalid as newly-valid without adding new functionality using it. :P)
